in the year of 1969-70? That's correct. Okay. Why
did you decide to become involved in the anti-war
movement at Southwest? Well, I'd been involved in
the anti-war movement in New York City, and when I
arrived at Southwest, there was very little in the
way of any war activities or organized activities
going on. So I, along with some other people, there
was a coffee house on campus that was sponsored by
one of the church groups. And that was sort of the
focal point where we started having meetings of
people who shared a similar interest in seeking to
organize protests to speak out in a unified,
organized manner against the war in Vietnam.
Okay, did you have more than one organization or
was it one central organization there at the
university? At the time I got there, there wasn't
any organization. What we did was we organized an
ad hoc committee to organize anti-war activities
and basically I along with a few other students
formed a committee that began to organize and
coordinate anti-war protests. Okay and how many
students did you have by the time you left involved
in the movement? I would say that by the time I left
they were probably some three to four hundred
students that were actively involved. And how
many students were at Southwest at that time? I
think it was something like 12,000. 12,000? Okay,
to you and to the people who formed the committee,
what did the whole terminology of movement mean to
you? It meant a way of expressing our sentiment,
our belief about what was going on in Vietnam, that
this country should not be participating in that
kind of activity, and that we were not going to just
passively sit back and allow the government to
initiate and continue policies that we were very
much opposed to. There were points in terms of
demonstrations at Southwest Texas that at one
point probably involved as much as 10% of the
student body. So more people just joined with you?
More people joined. The demonstration the
evening that we were suspended from school in
November probably had 2,000 people. Many people
who even did not agree with our views necessarily,
or at least had felt some kinship with our views,
decided this was a terrible way to treat students,
people who were expressing themselves on the
Ernie Ward position. But it also brought out other
students who felt strongly about the war, had some
misgivings about the war, and were finally
speaking out against it, or at least engaging in
some activity designed to protest our activity. I
think what it showed the administration was that
many students did not like what was going on in
Vietnam. They had some misgivings. It was
difficult for a lot of students because a lot of the
students there had grown up in very conservative
rural Texas or small town Texas backgrounds. And
you just didn't question authority. You didn't
question administrators. And this was something
that people decided to do. In the article that you
have in the Texas magazine, I don't know if you
remember that, you talk about your parents, they
had the American dream. And you also talk about...
how it was a time that you could question the things
that you weren't supposed to question and just
forbidden things that you shouldn't talk about.
How did your parents feel about what you were doing
at school? Well, they were very much upset about
it. They were concerned about it because they
thought that somehow this wasn't right, that you
don't question the authority of the government to
do what it deems necessary in its governmental
policies. and it was very upsetting for them. They
grew up in a time when the government was, you just
don't question the governmental authority.
Okay, what were the aims and goals of the
organization itself? The aims of the
organization were to try and make students aware
of what was going on in Vietnam and to try and give
students a vehicle to express their opposition to
the war in Vietnam. The goal was to try and get the
government to change its policies in Vietnam.
It wasn't only, I think, to try and stop the draft,
but certainly a lot of draft age people were
involved at that time. But it just wasn't merely
that we were going to be shipped off to war. It was an
overall expression that the policy that this
government was pursuing was one that was unfair
and unjust, and we wanted to try and change that.
And we believed that by voicing opposition, by
mobilizing public opinion, that the government
would have to change its policy. And also, it was
one of encouraging people our age to think before
blindly going in and serving in the armed forces.
to pursue a policy that we thought was just inane.
Okay, do you feel that you reached any of these
goals that the organization had? I think we did. In
terms of the goals also, the goal was to provide a
vehicle for expression among students and people
in the community to express their feelings
against the war. I think that we brought about a
change in governmental policy. I mean, we being
San Marcos as part of what we viewed with the entire
anti-war movement ultimately brought about a
change. The government could not pursue its
policy the way it initially had planned because of
the intense opposition. I think as far as giving
people a means of expressing their opposition, I
think we really met that goal. Because a lot of
people who felt in opposition to the war were
inhibited because they weren't sure who else was
opposed to it or how other people might react. I
mean, demonstrations at that point were a very new
item in San Marcos. It had just never happened. And
people had a means where people joined. The first
demonstration drew quite a bit of a crowd. The
second one, a much larger crowd. There were
probably about 1,000 people all together. When I
gave you that figure earlier, about 300 to 400, I'd
say that's more of a core of people that were fairly
actively involved and could be counted on to
protest or join demonstrations. But there were
probably 1,000 people at the moratorium that was
held in September, or rather October, the first
one. And then the one in November where we were
suspended was even larger. Okay, so my next
question was, did you see any changes that took
place in Southwest? So obviously you did. And you
just went about getting these changes by having
more and more students gain confidence? Yeah,
confidence that they could speak out, that their
voice would have some effect. By voicing what they
felt, what their beliefs were, it would have some
effect on the administration. and the
administration was forced to basically allow
students their expression, their right of speech
that the administration had tried to stifle
before. The suspension of us, the administration
had to really back off when the Fifth Circuit
allowed us to go back in school and finish the
school year. Okay, in this article it said that
there were nine of you that were suspended. That's
correct, nine students. Is that the nine leaders
of the organization, quote-unquote leaders?
Right, quote. It also says that later ruled that
you were denied the student credit. Right. What
happened was we were allowed to finish the school
year. The administration would not give us the
actual credits we had earned until there was a
final resolution of the case. How long did that
take? That took about three more years. So for
three years, you were in limbo as to whether you had
the credit for that year. That's right. OK, that
kind of gets in the way of school. Yeah, it
essentially lost. I mean, even at that point, I
went ahead and graduated from City University of
New York in June of 72. And it wasn't until that fall
that the US Supreme Court finally ruled. So it
almost was moot at that point. But yeah, I just
couldn't count on those points. Right. What was
your draft status? It was the college deferment,
which I believe was 1S or 2S, which was just a
college student. I read in another article in a
book,
what part did you play in the class war, Daddy? And
they were talking about how he tried to get out of
being put through the draft board by being really
underweight for being his height. Did you know a
lot of... Well, sure. I knew of people who either
tried to exaggerate any kind of physical defect or
play on psychiatric or psychological problems.
There's a myriad of ways people seem to try and use,
yeah. There was a lot of that. Did you have an
underground newspaper? Yes, we did. It was called
the Weather Report. Do you have any copies of that?
I might, it's just been so long I'd have to look.
We also had the Purgatory Creek Press, which was
actually published in 1969. I'd have to look to see
if I've got any copies. Okay, if you had some would
you send those to me? Sure. Or copies of the copies?
Yeah, sure. Okay.
Were your views on the Vietnam War then versus now?
Well, I think in terms of my views then, I think I've
expressed those to you. Now, I still feel very much
the same way. It was a war that we should never have
gotten involved in. It caused tragic loss of
American life, loss of Vietnamese life. It
created a whole class of Americans that came back
from the war that were alienated, that had drug
problems, mental problems. It was just a great
disaster for American youth. I mean, still today
there are lots of guys who went off to Vietnam and
came back that have tremendous emotional as well
as physical problems because of what happened
there. I mean, it was just a war that was not
accepted. People came home and you weren't
considered a hero. People just looked at you
either as a killer or someone who didn't have
enough courage, you know, to tell the government
to go to hell.
And so I still feel the same way. I think that we were
pursuing basically a throwback to the
imperialist policies or this colonial type
policies that Americans had engaged in for many
years. And we just hadn't learned at that point
that you just can't keep on doing this. We met a
different kind of military foe in Vietnam that
could not be dealt with in conventional military
ways. Okay, you mentioned the fact that people
looked at returning veterans as people who
couldn't tell a government to go to hell. Do you
think that it had a lot to do with the Camelot that
Kennedy portrayed at the beginning of the war?
Yeah, I think that has something to do with it. I
think that a lot of people weren't really sure what
was going on in Vietnam. People still wanted to
believe the government when the government was
telling us that we were fighting, you know, to save
these people from a communist bloodbath or from,
you know, this communist slavery. And Americans
didn't have the means or the information to really
question, and a lot of them didn't think about it.
And it wasn't until a lot of the Vietnam veterans
who came back from the war started complaining and
questioning the policies that I think a lot more
people started taking note that maybe what the
government was telling us was not completely
true. And at that point I think there was a
contingent of Vietnam vets. Two of the people in
our group, or at least one of them for sure, had been
to Vietnam and had fought. as a whole or at
Southwest, was it based on issues or ideologies or
both? I'd say a combination of both. You had, I
think, a broad spectrum of people in terms of their
ideology. But the various issues about the war
united people. People felt this was not right,
that we should not be in this war, and that it wasn't
accomplishing any purpose. that what we were
doing was slaughtering a lot of people. It was an
endless, senseless loss of life. How did the
community of San Marcos react to the protesters at
the school? They were very hostile to the
protesters, to the activities that were going on.
We were joined by some members of the community,
some faculty members, and some people who lived in
the community.
But for the most part, we were basically
considered agitators, people who were just
causing trouble, communists. I was called Yankee
agitator by a number of people. They didn't like it
at all. They just saw this as a great, tragic,
treasonous-type disruption of their community.
Growing up with the parents that you had and their
American dream and you believing this for years
and years, and suddenly something coming up
against that, and then someone calling you a
communist and saying you're part of a conspiracy,
that burst your bubble of what the American dream
was about? I wouldn't say it burst my bubble. It
made me realize that people that, you know, for a
long time I had just incorrectly held to too much of
an authoritarian type line that many people in
this country had, that you know, certain things
were always right. Whatever the government did
was basically right. And that, I learned at that
point, or had in high school realized, come to
realize that that was not always true. I went to a
high school where we were taught very much to
question almost everything. And I think that
carried on to my years in college. And as a result, I
just could no longer just hold to the same kind of
ideology that my parents and relatives had.
Speaking of the community and how they reacted to
you, did you ever face any physical danger
yourself? How did the police react to you in the
establishment? I faced a number of threats and
there were a couple of close calls with vehicles in
terms of that seemed like, you know, I'd been
almost hit a few times by cars. There was a lot of
threats, a lot of people in passing cars or just
there were some phone calls and things like that.
There was quite a number of threats. The police
seemed indifferent to it. We also had a
demonstration that May or April of 70, in which we
almost had a physical confrontation that the
school officials apparently chose to ignore, and
we were able to diffuse it at the last moment by
basically singing America the Beautiful and a few
other things. But there was, the school officials
basically would not have minded if we'd have
gotten beaten up. Okay. Also in that month, May 3rd
and 4th of 1970, There were four students killed
and 10 wounded at Kent State by the Ohio National
Guard. What was the reaction in San Marcos and the
Southwest about that? We had a candlelight
demonstration the night or two following the Kent
State incident. And there were well over 1,000
students that participated in that. And we also
had the demonstration I just described to you.
during the day in which the administration, there
were a lot of cowboys around that were threatening
us, and the administration basically just chose
to ignore it. And fortunately, though, there
wasn't any violence.
Going on towards civil rights a little bit, did
Southwest have any black students at that time?
Were they enrolled? They had some. They had a black
club a black political club. The black student
body was still very small. Did they join you in the
movement against Vietnam? Some of the blacks did.
I'd say there were several blacks in the
organization, but not a lot. The blacks were
somewhat uncertain in the sense that they had
relatives who were telling them this was wrong,
and they were just very uncertain about joining
that kind of activity. Were you involved in any
part of this civil rights movement? I had been
involved in some marches in New York City in high
school. But as such, in San Marcos, it was
essentially the anti-war movement. Were there
quite a few women involved in the movement? Yeah,
there were, I'd say, probably at least a third And
there was no problem with them being involved in
that group? It wasn't a sexist movement? No, I
would say no. There are several organizations
listed in this book, three. The students working
for a democratic society on campus, and
the Student Mobilization Committee. Right. Did
those play an effect on your campus? Were you
involved in those? Were they... Yeah, the Student
Mobilization Committee was kind of a nationwide,
or at least it operated out of Washington, or they
had various chapters. There was a chapter in
Austin that we coordinate our activities with,
because we did go to a major Washington
demonstration through the Austin chapter. in
November or December of 69. And that was basically
a group that laid out strategies and set dates,
national dates for activities. So that was a group
that was basically provided some leadership or
some direction for local chapters around the
country. And we sort of saw our group as basically a
chapter of the Student Mobilization Committee.
The Students for a Democratic Society, by 69, did
not have a chapter in, they had one in Austin, but
not in San Marcos. They, at that time, they were
beginning to fade out, weren't they? Yeah, by 69
they had, because in May of 69, there were the
demonstrations at Columbia by Mark Rudd, who was
one of the leaders of the SDS. That was sort of the
beginning of the end where it started to fade out.
In the book, Who Spoke Up?, there was mention of
bombings and arsons, arson cases sweeping the
country at college campuses. How did the people at
Southwest feel about that type of violent action?
The administration was extremely paranoid about
that happening. There were not any instances of
bombing or arson. But the administration was
extremely paranoid that that would happen. And at
one point, we had a demonstration where we marched
on the administration building. And we later
found out that the administration had ordered
records sealed and locked. And they were afraid
that we could go into the records and destroy
things. The administration was extremely
paranoid. All of our demonstrations were heavily
marked by security, campus security, watching
us. In the same book, Kissinger is quoted as
saying, Nixon never found the language of respect
and compassion, which might have created a bridge
at least to the more moderate elements of the
anti-war movement, so that civil war conditions
developed. Did you at the time feel that you were
involved in a civil war? I wouldn't say, well, not a
civil war in the sense that we had bullets flying
between sides, But it was a situation with a great
deal of tension, a great deal of almost daily
confrontation, a great deal of threats, extreme
concern for one's safety. And I felt that at any
time, any of us could be harmed. And there was a
feeling of us against them. The community was
deeply divided, and we were in a much smaller
segment. And we were considered as somehow
traitors, people who, you know, we were, a lot of
the townspeople, a lot of people who'd never been
to college, viewed us as having some kind of
privilege to go to college, and how could we be
doing this, meaning, you know, complaining to our
elders about their policies when they'd given us
college. I mean, there was this kind of mentality.
How did the coverage of Vietnam on television
through the news and newsreels. How did that
affect the movement? I think it had a very positive
effect on the movement. I thought television
brought home the reality of what was going on in
Vietnam. People saw that it was gruesome, that it
wasn't getting anywhere, and that it was not the
way the administration wanted us to believe it was
happening. In your own terms, can you define
hippie? Yeah. I suppose hippie was someone who was
opposed to the establishment ways of doing
things, the orthodox ways of doing things, and
people who did various things to indicate their
nonconformity by dress, clothing, use of drugs,
hairstyles,
shoe styles. Someone who was out of, away from or
wanted to indicate that he did not go along with the
mainstream. But in 69, you had a lot of people who
ideologically were hippies, in the sense that
they did not conform or did not believe a lot of what
the mainstream or a lot of what... They didn't
conform with the government's policies or
believe or like the government's policies, but
were still afraid to dress or act very
differently. So you were a hippie? Yeah, I guess
you'd have to say that. But at the time, you were
proud to wear that label. Sure. I mean, at that
time, that didn't bother me, and it still doesn't.
I've been called an aging hippie.
Do you consider the movement a failure or success,
and in what ways? I consider it a success for a
number of reasons. One, it got people thinking. It
got people to think about their government's
policies. It got people to realize that they could
question them. And it got people to realize that by
acting or by speaking out against what they felt
was wrong or what was incorrect by the government,
they could bring about a change. And I think that
was probably the greatest success. I also think it
was successful in the sense that it did bring about
a change in the war. cut down eventually on the
slaughter that was going on in Vietnam, both of
Americans and Vietnamese. Do you feel that it
failed in any way? Well, I think the only, in the
sense of failure, it was not able to get the
government to change its position soon. I feel
like the failure is in the sense that it did not
bring about a quicker change. It did not get
people, more people involved. or convince more
people to act on their beliefs. I believe in 1969
there was a great deal of sentiment against the
Vietnam War, and most people just basically held
it back. Okay, when do you believe that the
movement ended, and why did it end? I think it ended
with the withdrawal of troops from Vietnam. I
thought at that point people felt like there was no
longer a need to protest about the government's
policies because we weren't fighting in Vietnam.
And I thought it kind of came to an abrupt end then.
Although the movement tried to grab onto other
issues, other policies, and keep itself going as a
means of protesting or speaking out against what
were considered unfair or unjust governmental
policies. But it's very hard to get people
involved and organized to get them out of the daily
routine to really complain or protest about
things that are going on that are not fair or just.
When did you decide and why did you decide to go to
law school? I had always wanted to be a lawyer even
as a child, but I had somewhat questioned that in
college. I think that what I went through in 69 just
firmed up my resolve to go to law school because I
realized that you could have so much more power and
be so much more effective using the legal system
than you could not being able to use that system.
Essentially, that's our society's way of
fighting. That's the sanctioned or approved way
of fighting in this culture. And I thought that if
there was something I didn't believe in or
something that I wanted to change that I felt was
unfair, the courts were a way of doing it. Are you
satisfied with the role you played in the
movement? If you could, would you change
anything? If I could, I would have liked to have
stayed. Well, if I could have done anything
differently, I would have liked to have been able
to spend even more time trying to get more students
involved, more people involved. There was just a
limit on time and facilities. But I wish I could
have gotten even more students
involved. That's all the questions I have right
now. Do you feel that there's anything I've left
out that you consider? I
guess in terms of...
One of the things that you might think about or that
I think is important is how that affected people,
you know, today. I mean, how their activities in
the movement affected them. And I think that it had
an effect. It made people realize that they could
do something about governmental policies they
could band together and speak out. And I think a lot
of people who were involved in anti-war
activities went on to things like the Sierra Club,
environmental type activities, civil rights
activities or women's issues. that a lot of areas
of the law, especially being a lawyer, I can see
that a lot of areas of the law that just literally
did not exist in the late 60s are now recognized by
the courts. And I think it changed the American
legal scene in terms of people learned that they
could do something in the system to fight. Do you
keep in touch with the other eight people that you
were suspended with? Yes, I do. We get together. We
had a reunion in 79 after 10 years, and we'd see each
other periodically. Most of them still live
around Austin. And amazingly, even in 69, 79, we
got together, the administration set up a
policeman with a camera to take pictures
surreptitiously, you know, but he was there on the
top of the building taking pictures.
Yeah, I keep in touch. We generally get together
about once a year now, kind of reflect on what's
going on and things like that. In this article, you
went back to San Marcos in 72 and you said the
students were apathetic. Was it hard for you to
believe that after all that you'd worked for, you
could come back so soon thereafter and have
everything so different? Yeah, it was hard to
believe. It was very frustrating because now, at
that time, students could then vote in 72. And
because of the nature of San Marcos, the size and
the size of the university, the students could
have dictated the local government. I mean, they
could have elected a mayor, councilman, a lot. And
students just didn't care about it.